[docs] Add dbt defer and Dagster branch deployments guide (#24760)
dagster-io/dagster: docs/content/integrations/dbt/reference.mdx

---

## Leveraging dbt defer with branch deployments

> It is possible to leverage [dbt defer](https://docs.getdbt.com/reference/node-selection/defer) by passing a `state_path` to <PyObject object="DbtProject" module="dagster_dbt" />. This allows you to run a subset of models or tests based on the changes made since the state passed to `state_path`.

Reviewer: > This allows you to run a subset of models or tests based on the changes made since the state passed to `state_path`.

I'm not sure I fully understand this. Based on what changes?

Author: That's fair - I've updated the content to address all your comments. All changes made in [3971f71](https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster/pull/24760/commits/3971f7182585ff67c818ff0619bba613ffa35b13)

> In practice, this is most useful when combined with branch deployments in Dagster+, to test changes made in your branches. This can be easily done by updating your Dagster code and your CI/CD files.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In practice, this is most useful when combined with branch deployments in Dagster+ to test changes made in your branches. This can be done by updating your Dagster code and your CI/CD files.
```

Avoid 'simply, easily' etc. Nothing is simple or easy.

> First, update your Dagster code to pass a `state_path` to your `DbtProject` object. Also, update the dbt command in your `@dbt_assets` definition to pass the defer args using `get_defer_args`.

Reviewer: I struggle here. You are asking me to pass a `state_path` but I don't know what `state_path` I should be passing. Where is the state saved? How is it saved? Who is creating it?

```python startafter=start_use_dbt_defer_with_dbt_project endbefore=end_use_dbt_defer_with_dbt_project file=/integrations/dbt/dbt.py dedent=4
import os
from pathlib import Path

from dagster import AssetExecutionContext
from dagster_dbt import DbtCliResource, DbtProject, dbt_assets

my_dbt_project = DbtProject(
    project_dir=Path(__file__).joinpath("..", "..", "..").resolve(),
    packaged_project_dir=Path(__file__)
    .joinpath("..", "..", "dbt-project")
    .resolve(),
    state_path=Path("state"),
)
my_dbt_project.prepare_if_dev()

@dbt_assets(manifest=my_dbt_project.manifest_path)
def my_dbt_assets(
    context: AssetExecutionContext,
    dbt: DbtCliResource,
):
    yield from dbt.cli(["build", *dbt.get_defer_args()], context=context).stream()
```

> Note that value passed to `state_path` must be a path, relative to the dbt project directory, to a directory of dbt artifacts. In the code above, we set the `state_path` to 'state/'.

Reviewer: Not clear to me where or when the artifacts are created

Now that the Dagster code is updated, we need to update your CI/CD files to manage the state of your dbt project using the dagster-cloud CLI. This will ensure that dbt correctly uses your deferred artifacts as part of our Dagster+ branch deployments.

You might have one or two CI/CD files to manage your production and branch deployments. In these files, find the steps related to your dbt project - refer to the [Deploying a Dagster project with a dbt project](#deploying-a-dagster-project-with-a-dbt-project) section for more information.

Once your dbt steps are located, add the following step to manage the state of your dbt project.

```bash

> dagster-cloud ci dagster-dbt project manage-state --file path/to/project.py

Reviewer 2: Does this command store the prod manifest at the path `state` used earlier in the code example?

Author: Yes. It is mentioned below, but I can rephrase if you think it should be clearer.

Reviewer: I think we should lead with this and then do the code change next. It would help to have an overview section that talks through the steps first briefly. For example:

In order to be able to use `dbt defer` we will do the following:
1. Add a command to our CI/CD pipeline that saves a state file to a given location
2. Update our Dagster dbt code to reference this new state file. 
3. ...Some other step?

```

> The `dagster-cloud ci dagster-dbt project manage-state` CLI command above can be used to manage syncing the production manifest to branches when a `state_path` is set on your `DbtProject` object. This ensure that your branch deployments are always compared to the most recent adopted changes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `dagster-cloud ci dagster-dbt project manage-state` CLI command fetches the `manifest.json` file form your production branch and saves it to the state directory provided, in order to power the `dbt defer` command.
```

I would combine the two paragraphs and keep things simpler.

```python startafter=start_use_dbt_defer_with_dbt_project endbefore=end_use_dbt_defer_with_dbt_project file=/integrations/dbt/dbt.py dedent=4
import os
from pathlib import Path

from dagster import AssetExecutionContext
from dagster_dbt import DbtCliResource, DbtProject, dbt_assets

my_dbt_project = DbtProject(
    project_dir=Path(__file__).joinpath("..", "..", "..").resolve(),
    packaged_project_dir=Path(__file__)
    .joinpath("..", "..", "dbt-project")
    .resolve(),
    state_path=os.getenv("DBT_STATE_PATH"),
)
my_dbt_project.prepare_if_dev()

@dbt_assets(manifest=my_dbt_project.manifest_path)
def my_dbt_assets(
    context: AssetExecutionContext,
    dbt: DbtCliResource,
):
    yield from dbt.cli(["build", *dbt.get_defer_args()], context=context).stream()
```

In the code above, notice that the `state_path` is set using the `DBT_STATE_PATH` environment variable. This allows to pass a value to `state_path` only when needed - in our case, the `DBT_STATE_PATH` environment variable should be set only in a branch deployment context.

> To do so, we need to update the `.github/workflows/branch_deployments.yml` file to set a value to the `DBT_STATE_PATH` environment variable. This will ensure that dbt uses a state path only as part of our Dagster+ branch deployments.

Author: After re-reading the code of `dagster-cloud ci dagster-dbt project manage-state`, we won't be needing the env var. Will update the guide accordingly.

Open the file, scroll to the environment variable section, and set an environment variable named `DBT_STATE_PATH` to the path where your state artifacts are located. This should be on or around line 12:

```bash
env:
  DAGSTER_CLOUD_URL: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_ORGANIZATION }}
  DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN: ${{ secrets.DAGSTER_CLOUD_API_TOKEN }}
  ENABLE_FAST_DEPLOYS: 'true'
  PYTHON_VERSION: '3.8'
  DAGSTER_CLOUD_FILE: 'dagster_cloud.yaml'

>   DBT_STATE_PATH: 'path/to/artifacts'

Reviewer 2: I think this leaves a bit too much to the reader. 

Maybe we could describe how they could go about managing these artifacts and what specifically they are? Or should we suggest `dagster-cloud ci dagster-dbt project manage-state` ?

Author: That's fair. I updated the guide in [ebdcd56](https://github.com/dagster-io/dagster/pull/24760/commits/ebdcd562fec4065cc16cdca26d409b6a604cae42)
